metaQuantome tutorial: part I (#2039)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/proteomics/tutorials/metaquantome-data-creation/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: metaQuantome Data creation tutorial
zenodo_link: "https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4037137"
questions:
 - "How do I perform functional and taxonomy analysis on metaproteomics data?"
 - "How can I perform quantitation on metaproteomics data?"
 - "How do I create inputs that can be used in metaquantome to examine differentially expressed proteins?"
objectives:
  - "A taxonomy, functional and quantitational analysis of metaproteomic mass spectrometry data."
time_estimation: "1h"
key_points:
  - "Use dataset collections"
  - "With SearchGUI and PeptideShaker you can gain access to multiple search engines"
  - "Learning the basics of SQL queries can pay off"
contributors:
  - subinamehta
  - timothygriffin
  - pratikdjagtap 
  - emmaleith
  - mariecrane

---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

Metaproteomics involves characterization of community level expression of microbial proteins from an environmental 
or clinical sample. Metaproteomics data is primarily used to determine the functional status of the microbiome under 

> study along with its taxonomic composition. The Galaxy-P team published a software suite named [metaQuantome](https://www.mcponline.org/content/18/8_suppl_1/S82) to enable quantitative and statistical analysis and visualization of functional, taxonomic expression as well as functional and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
study along with its taxonomic composition. The [Galaxy-P](http://galaxyp.org/) team published a software suite named [metaQuantome](https://www.mcponline.org/content/18/8_suppl_1/S82) to enable quantitative and statistical analysis and visualization of functional, taxonomic expression as well as functional and 
```

taxonomy interaction. metaQuantome leverages peptide level quantitative information to analyze the taxonomic, functional 
expression within the microbial community in different conditions.

![Microbiome](../../images/microbiome.png){: width="75%"}
 
metaQuantome offers differential abundance analysis, principal components analysis, and clustered heat map visualizations, 
across multiple experimental conditions. metaQuantome, an open source tool, is available via command line and also 
accessible via Galaxy platform for reproducible analysis. As a first step for metaQuantome analysis, metaproteomics 
data needs to be made compatible for subsequent analysis. With this in mind, we have developed a metaQuantome data 

> generation workflow tutorial that ill help users generate inputs for metaQuantome analysis.

Reviewer: Typo: `s/ill/will/`

![Workflow](../../images/metaquantomeworkflow.png){: width="75%"}

To demonstrate the use of the data creation workflow, we have used a thermophilic biogas reactor dataset wherein municipal 
food waste and manure is digested to generate methane gas. After one round in the reactor, the microbial community was 
simplified and enriched via serial dilution. This inoculum was then transferred to a solution of cellulose from Norwegian 
Spruce and incubated at 65°C. Triplicate samples were taken in a time series from 0 to 43 hours after inoculation and mass 
spectrometry data was acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer. For this training, we have chosen two time points-8 hour and 33 hour.

![Dataset](../../images/biogasdataset.png){: width="75%"}

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# **Pretreatments**

The first step in a tutorial is to get the data from the zenodo link provided and making sure that it is in the correct format.

## *Get data*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Data upload
>

> > 1. Create a new history for this tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a meaningful name
>
>    {% include snippets/create_new_history.md %}
>    {% include snippets/rename_history.md %}
>
```

> > 2. Import the files ( 6 MZML files, a Protein FASTA file and Experimental Design file) from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. Import the files: 6 MZML files (format=`mzml`, a Protein FASTA file (format=`fasta`), and an Experimental Design file (format=`tabular`) from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) 
```

Reviewer: I suggest specifically confirming what the datatypes/formats of the files should be.

>    or from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ExperimentalDesign.tsv
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ProteinDB_cRAP.fasta
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T2_A1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T2_B1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T7A_1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T7B_1.mzml
>    ```
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
>
>
> 3. Build a **Dataset list** for the four mzml files.
>    - Click the **Operations on multiple datasets** check box at the top of the history panel
>       ![Operations on multiple datasets button](../../images/operations_icon.png)
>    - Check the four boxes next to the mzml files.

> >    - Click **For all selected...** and choose **Build dataset list**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    - Click **For all selected...** and choose **Build dataset list**
>    - Enter a name for the new collection
```

>
> 4. Rename the datasets (IF needed)
> 5. Check that the datatype ( Make sure they are in the correct formats).
>
>    {% include snippets/change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}

> >

Reviewer: I suggest moving the step for checking datatypes to before the step for building a dataset list. That way, the files are in the correct format from the start.

## *Filter* - Molecular Function

This step is used to filter out the GO terms with molecular function and the corresponding number of peptides associated with these terms.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Extracting molecular function for metaQuantome
>
> 1. {% tool [Filter](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Filter"*: `Unipept_Function` (output of **Query Tabular** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"With following condition"*: `c5=='molecular function'`
>    - *"Number of header lines to skip"*: `1`
> 2. Rename file as `go_mf`
{: .hands_on}

![Molecular-Function](../../images/molecularfunction.png){: width="60%"}

# **Conclusion**
{:.no_toc}

This completes the walkthrough of the metaQuantome data creation workflow .This tutorial is a guide to have datasets that are metaQuantome ready/compatible and can be used for metaproteomics research. We have incorporated only two conditions in this workflow but users can use as many as they want. Researchers can use this workflow with their data also, please make sure the tool parameters and the workflow will be needed to be modified accordingly.

> Please look at the following tutorials in this Metaproteomics series:

Reviewer 2: You can also put recommended follow-up tutorials in the metadata, and they will get rendered nicely in a box at the end, like:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2563865/96109144-a513d100-0ede-11eb-973b-22183b2244df.png)

which was done by adding the following metadata:

```
follow_up_training:
    -
        type: "internal"
        topic_name: transcriptomics
        tutorials:
            - rna-seq-viz-with-heatmap2
            - rna-seq-viz-with-volcanoplot
            - rna-seq-genes-to-pathways

```

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: metaQuantome Data creation tutorial
zenodo_link: '(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4037137)'
questions:
 - "How do I perform functional and taxonomy analysis on metaproteomics data?"
 - "How can I perform quantitation on metaproteomics data?"
 - "How do I create inputs that can be used in metaquantome to examine differentially expressed proteins?"
objectives:
  - "A taxonomy, functional and quantitational analysis of metaproteomic mass spectrometry data."
time_estimation: "1 hr"
key_points:
  - "Use dataset collections"
  - "With SearchGUI and PeptideShaker you can gain access to multiple search engines"
  - "Learning the basics of SQL queries can pay off"
contributors:
  - subinamehta
  - timothygriffin
  - pratikdjagtap 
  - emmaleith

>   - mariecrane

Reviewer 2: please add this contributor to the CONTRIBUTORS.yaml file

Author: added marie

>    - In *"Scan Inclusion/Exclusion Filters"*:
>        - *"Filter MS Levels"*: `Yes`
>    - In *"General Options"*:
>        - *"Sum adjacent scans"*: `Yes`
>        - *"Output multiple runs per file"*: `Yes`
>
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >This is a critical step for running this workflow. 
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Why do we need to convert the files to MGF?
> 2. Can we use any other input format?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. The files have to be converted to MGF for this workflow because we use SearchGUI as the searching tool and it can only read MGF files.
> > 2. Yes, we can also use RAW files as input and just convert RAW files to MGF.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

##  *Search GUI*
SearchGUI is a tool that searches sequence databases on any number of MGF files. In this case, the previously made collection of three MGF files (entitles MGF files) will be used as the MS/MS input. This tool will produce an output file, called a SearchGUI archive file. This file will serve as in input for the next tool used, PeptideShaker.
>

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Search sequence databases
```

>
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: 
>
> 1. {% tool [FlashLFQ](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/flashlfq/flashlfq/1.0.3.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"identification file"*: `outfile` (output of **Replace Text** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"spectrum files"*: `output` (output of **msconvert** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"match between runs"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Use experimental design for normalization or protein fold-change analysis"*: `Yes`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"ExperimentalDesign.tsv"*: `output` (Input dataset)
>        - *"Perform Bayesian protein fold-change analysis"*: `Yes`
>            - *"control condition for Bayesian protein fold-change analysis"*: ``
>
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > [FlashLFQ](https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/FlashLFQ) is a label-free quantification tool for mass-spectrometry proteomics. It supports both .mzML and Thermo .raw file formats. 
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>

> > 1. Can it be used with fractionated data?
> > 2. Does it perform peptide and protein level quantification?
> >
> > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > >
> > > 1. Yes, this tool can be used with fractionated datasets and multiple conditions
> > > 2. It performed both peptide level and protein level quantification, For protein level it used Bayesian Fold change analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. Can FlashLFQ be used with fractionated data?
> 2. Does FlashLFQ perform peptide and protein level quantification?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. Yes, FlashLFQ can be used with fractionated datasets and multiple conditions
> > 2. FlashLFQ performed both peptide level and protein level quantification. For protein level, FlashLFQ used Bayesian Fold change analysis.
```

>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular Input Containing Peptide column"*: `out_file1` (output of **Filter** {% icon tool %})
>        - *"Select column with peptides"*: `c1`
>    - *"Choose outputs"*: ``
>
>
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > There are two Unipept in this workflow, One for taxonomy and other for function.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

![Taxa](../../images/taxa.png){: width="75%"}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Can any other taxonomy and functional tool be used apart from Unipept?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. Yes, any tool can be used for taxonomy and functional output. Please make sure the output has the information that incluldes peptide,taxon_name, taxon_id, genus, species etc.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

The JSON output from the Taxonomy can be visualized using the visualize option and Select the Unipept Taxonomyviewer. 

![Unipept-JSON](../../images/UnipeptJSON.png){: width="30%"}

![Taxa-viewer](../../images/unipept_taxonomy_viewer.png){: width="30%"}

![Output](../../images/UnipeptJSONoutput.png){: width="75%"}

## *Unipept* for Functional annotation

> Unipept is used to match tryptic peptides and find the taxonomy and Functional annotation of the peptides. Unipept is used to match sample tryptic peptides to proteins using a fast-matching algorithm. Although Unipept can be accessed and used through the web page, the use of Unipept on galaxy allows the production of output datasets including the peptide information to be used in sequential steps. Unipept requires a list containing the peptide sequences which was generated by Query Tabular.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unipept is used to match tryptic peptides and find the taxonomy and Functional annotation of the peptides. Unipept is used to match sample tryptic peptides to proteins using a fast-matching algorithm. Although Unipept can be accessed and used through the web page, the use of Unipept on Galaxy allows the production of output datasets including the peptide information to be used in sequential steps. Unipept requires a list containing the peptide sequences which was generated by Query Tabular.
```

>    - *"Cut columns"*: `c1,c3`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"From"*: `output_ec_tsv` (output of **Unipept** {% icon tool %})
>
{: .hands_on}

## *Filtering confident peptides*

Query Tabular is a tool that can load tabular data into a SQLite database. This step precedes UniPept, as a list containing the peptide sequences must be generated. In this step a list of gene ontology (GO) terms is being generated.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: 
>
> 1. {% tool [Query Tabular](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/query_tabular/query_tabular/3.0.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - In *"Database Table"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Database Table"*
>            - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular Dataset for Table"*: `output_go_tsv` (output of **Unipept** {% icon tool %})
>            - In *"Table Options"*:
>                - *"Specify Name for Table"*: `Goterm`
>                - *"Specify Column Names (comma-separated list)"*: `peptide,total_protein_count,go_term,protein_count,go_name,go_funct`
>    - *"SQL Query to generate tabular output"*: `SELECT Goterm.*
```
FROM Goterm 
WHERE ((1.0*Goterm.protein_count)/(1.0*Goterm.total_protein_count)) >= 0.05

> ```

Reviewer: Fix the SQL query here so that the SELECT statement is moved to within the formatting:
```
SELECT Goterm.*
FROM Goterm
WHERE ((1.0*Goterm.protein_count)/(1.0*Goterm.total_protein_count)) >= 0.05
```

### *Convert mzml to MGF with msconvert*

msconvert is used in order to convert the input file type, a mzml data collection, to a mgf file type.
The mgf file type can then be used as the Input Peak Lists when running SearchGUI.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: mzml to MGF
>
> 1. {% tool [msconvert](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/msconvert/msconvert/3.0.19052.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Input unrefined MS data"*: `Input dataset collection`
>    - *"Do you agree to the vendor licenses?"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Output Type"*: `mgf`
>    - In *"Data Processing Filters"*:
>        - *"Apply peak picking?"*: `Yes`
>        - *"Apply m/z refinement with identification data?"*: `No`
>        - *"(Re-)calculate charge states?"*: `No`
>        - *"Filter m/z Window"*: `No`
>        - *"Filter out ETD precursor peaks?"*: `No`
>        - *"De-noise MS2 with moving window filter"*: `No`
>    - In *"Scan Inclusion/Exclusion Filters"*:
>        - *"Filter MS Levels"*: `No`
>    - In *"General Options"*:
>        - *"Sum adjacent scans"*: `No`

> >        - *"Output multiple runs per file"*: `YNo`

Reviewer 2: `YNo` -> yes or no?

>
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >This is a critical step for running this workflow.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Why do we need to convert the files to MGF?
> 2. Can we use any other input format?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. The files have to be converted to MGF for this workflow because we use SearchGUI as the searching tool and it can only read MGF files.
> > 2. Yes, we can also use RAW files as input and just convert RAW files to MGF.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

##  *Search GUI*
SearchGUI is a tool that searches sequence databases on any number of MGF files. In this case, the previously made collection of three MGF files (entitles MGF files) will be used as the MS/MS input. This tool will produce an output file, called a SearchGUI archive file. This file will serve as in input for the next tool used, PeptideShaker.
>
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Search sequence databases
> 1. {% tool [Search GUI](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/peptideshaker/search_gui/3.3.10.1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Protein Database"*: `ProteinDB_cRAP.fasta`

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input Peak Lists (mgf)"*: `output` (output of **msconvert** {% icon tool %})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Input Peak Lists (mgf)"*: `output` (output of **msconvert** {% icon tool %})
```

>    - In *"Search Engine Options"*:

> >        - *"DB-Search Engines"*: `Xtandem`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>        - *"DB-Search Engines"*: `X!Tandem`
```

>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > In Proteomics, contamination is generally detected as peaks in spectra that did not originate
from the samples and can be introduced in the sample from a variety of environmental sources or human error. Identification of these
contaminants is critical to enable their removal before data analysis, mainly, to maintain the validity of conclusions
drawn from statistical analyses. Thus, this selection tool helps us remove the contaminants that were identified in the spectral data.
>    {: .comment}
>

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Why is removing contaminants important?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. Ideally, we would like to remove known contaminants from our samples just to maintain discovering novel proteoforms in our sample.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

## *Removing file extensions for Quantification*
This is a data manipulation step to make the data compatible with other downstream processing tools. The Replace text tool replaces the .mgf extension from the PSM report so that it can be used as an input for FlashLFQ.
>
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Removing file extensions
>
>

> > 1. {% tool [Replace Text](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_replace_in_column/1.1.3) %} with the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. {% tool [Replace Text in a specific column](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_replace_in_column/1.1.3) %} with the following parameters:
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"File to process"*: `PSM_Report_no_contaminants` (output of **Select** {% icon tool %})
>    - In *"Replacement"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Replacement"*

> >            - *"in column"*: `c10`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>            - *"in column"*: `Column: 10`
```

> >            - *"Find pattern"*: `.mzml.mgf`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>            - *"Find pattern"*: `.raw.mgf`
```

>
{: .hands_on}

## *Extracting Peptide list*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Selecting peptide list
This step selects the peptide column from the Select output ( where we have removed the contaminants)
>
> 1. {% tool [Cut](Cut1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Cut columns"*: `c6`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"From"*: `Peptide_Report_no_contaminants` (output of **Select** {% icon tool %})
>
>2. Rename file as peptide_list.
{: .hands_on}

# **Peptide Quantification**

In this tutorial, we are using FlashLFQ as the quantitation tool. The user can choose to work with other quantitation tools, e.g. moFF and MaxQuant are available in Galaxy.

### *FlashLFQ*
FlashLFQ can quantify MS peaks in order to find the abundances of peptides. Additionally, the abundances of peptides within the sample can be compared between samples as further analysis beyond this workflow.
>
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Quantification
>
> 1. {% tool [FlashLFQ](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/flashlfq/flashlfq/1.0.3.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"identification file"*: `Input_for_FlashLFQ` (output of **Replace Text** {% icon tool %})

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"spectrum files"*: `MZML dataset collection`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"spectrum files"*: `MZML dataset collection`
```

WHERE ((1.0*Goterm.protein_count)/(1.0*Goterm.total_protein_count)) >= 0.05
```
>    - *"include query result column headers"*: `Yes`
>
> 2. Rename as Unipept_Function.
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > In the Unipept API output, the threshold is set to 0.5% of the overall number of peptides unambiguously assigned to a taxon at a particular taxonomic rank level. Here in the Galaxy platform, we are using Query tabular to perform this filtering.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

## *Removing Hashtag from output*

This step is to remove the hashtag from the Peptide header in the Unipept output.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Remove # from peptide header
> 1. {% tool [Replace Text](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_replace_in_line/1.1.2) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"File to process"*: `Unipept_Function` (output of **Unipept** {% icon tool %})
>    - In *"Replacement"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Replacement"*
>            - *"Find pattern"*: `#peptide`
>            - *"Replace with:"*: `peptide`
>
> 2. Rename file as All_functions
{: .hands_on}

## *Filter* - EC values

> We are using this Query tabular ot rename the output that we obtained from the Cut column tool.

Reviewer 2: ot -> to?

And I guess this tool does more than rename output from the cut tool? maybe have a look at this?

>        - *"Perform Bayesian protein fold-change analysis"*: `Yes`
>            - *"control condition for Bayesian protein fold-change analysis"*: `S1`
>
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > [FlashLFQ](https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/FlashLFQ) is a label-free quantification tool for mass-spectrometry proteomics. It supports both .mzML and Thermo .raw file formats.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Can FlashLFQ be used with fractionated data?
>
> 2. Does FlashLFQ perform peptide and protein level quantification?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. Yes, FlashLFQ can be used with fractionated datasets and multiple conditions
> >
> > 2. FlashLFQ performed both peptide level and protein level quantification. For protein level, FlashLFQ used Bayesian Fold change analysis.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

## *Filtering peptides that are less than 50 amino acids*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Extracting peptides<50 amino acids
> This is a data manipulation tool. Here, we select those peptides with less than 50 amino acids in length.
>

> > 1. {% tool [Filter](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. {% tool [Filter data on any column using simple expressions ](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:
```

generation workflow tutorial that will help users generate inputs for metaQuantome analysis.

![Workflow](../../images/metaquantomeworkflow.png){: width="75%"}

To demonstrate the use of the data creation workflow, we have used a thermophilic biogas reactor dataset wherein municipal 
food waste and manure is digested to generate methane gas. After one round in the reactor, the microbial community was 
simplified and enriched via serial dilution. This inoculum was then transferred to a solution of cellulose from Norwegian 
Spruce and incubated at 65°C. Triplicate samples were taken in a time series from 0 to 43 hours after inoculation and mass 
spectrometry data was acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer. For this training, we have chosen two time points-8 hour and 33 hour.

![Dataset](../../images/biogasdataset.png){: width="75%"}

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# **Pretreatments**

The first step in a tutorial is to get the data from the zenodo link provided and making sure that it is in the correct format.

## *Get data*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Data upload
>

> >  1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a meaningful name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a meaningful name
```

Reviewer: This will fix the incorrect numbering and indentation here.

>    or from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ExperimentalDesign.tsv
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ProteinDB_cRAP.fasta
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T2_A1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T2_B1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T7A_1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T7B_1.mzml
>    ```
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
>
>
> 3. Rename the datasets (If needed)
> 4. Check that the datatype ( Make sure they are in the correct formats).
> 6 MZML files (format=`mzml`, a Protein FASTA file (format=`fasta`), and an Experimental Design file (format=`tabular`)
>
>    {% include snippets/change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}
>
> 5. Add to each database a tag corresponding to the name of the input data (optional).
> 6. Build a **Dataset list** for the four mzml files.
>    - Click the **Operations on multiple datasets** check box at the top of the history panel
>      
>

> >   {% include snippets/create_dataset_collection.md datatype="collection" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>  {% include snippets/create_dataset_collection.md datatype="collection" %}
```

Reviewer: This will fix the incorrect indentation here.

>    - *"With following condition"*: `c5=='molecular function'`
>    - *"Number of header lines to skip"*: `1`
> 2. Rename file as go_mf
{: .hands_on}

![Molecular-Function](../../images/molecularfunction.png){: width="60%"}

# **Conclusion**
{:.no_toc}

This completes the walkthrough of the metaQuantome data creation workflow .This tutorial is a guide to have datasets that are metaQuantome ready/compatible and can be used for metaproteomics research. We have incorporated only two conditions in this workflow but users can use as many as they want. Researchers can use this workflow with their data also, please make sure the tool parameters and the workflow will be needed to be modified accordingly.

Please look at the following tutorials in this Metaproteomics series:

[Metaproteomics]({% link topics/proteomics/tutorials/metaproteomics/tutorial.md %})
This workflow is also available at [proteomics.usegalaxy.eu](https://proteomics.usegalaxy.eu/)

This workflow was developed by the Galaxy-P team at the University of Minnesota. For more information about Galaxy-P or our ongoing work, please visit us at galaxyp.org

> ### {% icon comment %} References
>

> > - {% Batut2018 %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - {% cite Batut2018 %}
```

Reviewer: Need to add `cite` at the beginning of all the citation blocks here. This should allow the linter to pass.

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: metaQuantome Data creation tutorial

> zenodo_link: '(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4037137)'

Reviewer: I think the parentheses here are failing the linting check. Suggest changing the line to:
```
zenodo_link: "https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4037137"
```

questions:
 - "How do I perform functional and taxonomy analysis on metaproteomics data?"
 - "How can I perform quantitation on metaproteomics data?"
 - "How do I create inputs that can be used in metaquantome to examine differentially expressed proteins?"
objectives:
  - "A taxonomy, functional and quantitational analysis of metaproteomic mass spectrometry data."

> time_estimation: "1 hr"

Reviewer: Change "1 hr" to "1h" to pass linting checks 👍

key_points:
  - "Use dataset collections"
  - "With SearchGUI and PeptideShaker you can gain access to multiple search engines"
  - "Learning the basics of SQL queries can pay off"
contributors:
  - subinamehta
  - timothygriffin
  - pratikdjagtap 
  - emmaleith
  - mariecrane

---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

Metaproteomics involves characterization of community level expression of microbial proteins from an environmental 
or clinical sample. Metaproteomics data is primarily used to determine the functional status of the microbiome under 
study along with its taxonomic composition. The Galaxy-P team published a software suite named [metaQuantome](https://www.mcponline.org/content/18/8_suppl_1/S82) to enable quantitative and statistical analysis and visualization of functional, taxonomic expression as well as functional and 
taxonomy interaction. metaQuantome leverages peptide level quantitative information to analyze the taxonomic, functional 
expression within the microbial community in different conditions.

<p align="center">
  <img width="850" height="500" src="../../images/microbiome.png">

> </p>

Reviewer: The linter seems to have issues with how the images are being called out after converting the tutorial.md to html:
```
- ./_site/training-material/topics/proteomics/tutorials/metaquantome-data-creation/tutorial.html
  *  image ../../images/microbiome.png does not have an alt attribute (line 444)
...
```

In other tutorials, images are called out using the following notation:
```
![CEL-Seq2 Scheme](../../images/celseq2_schema.svg "Read1 encapsulates the barcodes, and Read2 the mRNA sequence")
```

where `CEL-Seq2 Scheme` is the alt_text and `"Read1 encapsulates the barcodes, and Read2 the mRNA sequence"` is inserted as the legend for the figure. 

I suggest either:
1. Replacing html-style image call-outs to the markdown style shown above OR
1. Updating existing html-style image call-outs to include `alt` and `title` attributes, like:

```
<p align="center">
   <img width="850" height="500" src="../../images/microbiome.png" alt="<alt text>" title="<title>" />
   </p>
```

Maybe one of these options is preferred over the other by the training team?

Reviewer 2: thanks a lot for reviewing @malloryfreeberg! 

@subinamehta please use the markdown formatting for including slides, not html. If you need to modify the width of the image, you can do this like: `![description](path/to/image.png){: width="75%"}`

To demonstrate the use of the data creation workflow, we have used a thermophilic biogas reactor dataset wherein municipal 
food waste and manure is digested to generate methane gas. After one round in the reactor, the microbial community was 
simplified and enriched via serial dilution. This inoculum was then transferred to a solution of cellulose from Norwegian 
Spruce and incubated at 65°C. Triplicate samples were taken in a time series from 0 to 43 hours after inoculation and mass 
spectrometry data was acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer. For this training, we have chosen two time points-8 hour and 33 hour.

![Dataset](../../images/biogasdataset.png){: width="75%"}

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# **Pretreatments**

The first step in a tutorial is to get the data from the zenodo link provided and making sure that it is in the correct format.

## *Get data*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Data upload
>
>  1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a meaningful name
>
>    {% include snippets/create_new_history.md %}
>    {% include snippets/rename_history.md %}
>

> > 2. Import the files: 6 MZML files (format=`mzml`, a Protein FASTA file (format=`fasta`), and an Experimental Design file (format=`tabular`) from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) 

Reviewer 2: the format information might be nicer to put in step 4 below?

>    or from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ExperimentalDesign.tsv
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ProteinDB_cRAP.fasta
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T2_A1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T2_B1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T7A_1.mzml
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T7B_1.mzml
>    ```
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
>
>
> 3. Rename the datasets (If needed)
> 4. Check that the datatype ( Make sure they are in the correct formats).
>
>    {% include snippets/change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}
>
> 5. Add to each database a tag corresponding to the name of the input data (optional).
> 6. Build a **Dataset list** for the four mzml files.

> >    - Click the **Operations on multiple datasets** check box at the top of the history panel

Reviewer 2: We have a snippet for this you can use here

>
> 1. {% tool [Select](Grep1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Select lines from"*: `output_psm` (PSM report output of **Peptide Shaker** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"that"*: `NOT Matching`
>    - *"the pattern"*: `con_`
>
>
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > In Proteomics, contamination is generally detected as peaks in spectra that did not originate 
from the samples and can be introduced in the sample from a variety of environmental sources or human error. Identification of these 
contaminants is critical to enable their removal before data analysis, mainly, to maintain the validity of conclusions 
drawn from statistical analyses. Thus, this selection tool helps us remove the contaminants that were identified in the spectral data. 
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Why is removing contaminants important?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. Ideally, we would like to remove known contaminants from our samples just to maintain discovering novel proteoforms in our sample.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

> ## *Select*

Reviewer 2: I would remove this section header because this is not so informative, and the next step is conceptually still part of the contaminant removal

>    - *"With following condition"*: `c5=='molecular function'`
>    - *"Number of header lines to skip"*: `1`
> 2. Rename file as go_mf
{: .hands_on}

![Molecular-Function](../../images/molecularfunction.png){: width="60%"}

# **Conclusion**
{:.no_toc}

This completes the walkthrough of the metaQuantome data creation workflow .This tutorial is a guide to have datasets that are metaQuantome ready/compatible and can be used for metaproteomics research. We have incorporated only two conditions in this workflow but users can use as many as they want. Researchers can use this workflow with their data also, please make sure the tool parameters and the workflow will be needed to be modified accordingly.

Please look at the following tutorials in this Metaproteomics series:

[Metaproteomics]({% link topics/proteomics/tutorials/metaproteomics/tutorial.md %})
This workflow is also available at [proteomics.usegalaxy.eu](https://proteomics.usegalaxy.eu/)

This workflow was developed by the Galaxy-P team at the University of Minnesota. For more information about Galaxy-P or our ongoing work, please visit us at galaxyp.org

> > ### {% icon comment %} References

Reviewer 2: we have support for references in the framework, please add the citations in this box to the `tutorial.bib` file. They will then be automatically listed at the end of the tutorial in a references section. 

You can use [doi2bib](https://doi2bib.org) to generate the bibtex entries if you have a doi or PMCID for a reference, and for citing urls you can use this format:

```
@online{gtn-website,
  author = {GTN},
  title = {Galaxy Training Materials},
  url = {https://training.galaxyproject.org},
  urldate = {2020-10-13}
}
```
(And for citing them in the text you can use `{% cite gtn-webstie %}` for above example)

Reviewer 2: Thanks for adding the bib file entries! If you put the citations in the appropriate places in the tutorial text, you don't have to make this box at all, a references sections willl automatically show up at the end.

And if some of these things aren't mentioned in tutorial yet but you still want to cite them, I would make a little section at the end with "further reading" orso, and just describe what these resources are. E.g. "To learn more about X, we recommend this video describing .. {% cite Metaproteomics_video %}" etc.

</p>

To demonstrate the use of the data creation workflow, we have used a thermophilic biogas reactor dataset wherein municipal 
food waste and manure is digested to generate methane gas. After one round in the reactor, the microbial community was 
simplified and enriched via serial dilution. This inoculum was then transferred to a solution of cellulose from Norwegian 
Spruce and incubated at 65°C. Triplicate samples were taken in a time series from 0 to 43 hours after inoculation and mass 
spectrometry data was acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer. For this training, we have chosen two time points-8 hour and 33 hour.

<p align="center">
  <img width="800" height="300" src="../../images/biogasdataset.png" alt="Dataset" title="Dataset">
</p>

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# **Pretreatments**

The first step in a tutorial is to get the data from the zenodo link provided and making sure that it is in the correct format.

## *Get data*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Data upload
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial

> > 2. Import the files ( 6 MZML files, a Protein FASTA file and Experimental Design file) from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.4037137.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4037137) or from

Reviewer 2: You can leave this line the way it was generated by planemo. Since you filled in the Zenodo URL in the metadata, it will be automatically used here. This makes it easier if you update the data later, only have to change the metadata. Same for the `topic_name` and `page.title`, anything inside the double curly braces tags like `{{ x }}, is a jekyll variable and you don't have to change.

So change step 2 back to:
```
> 2. Import the files ( 6 MZML files, a Protein FASTA file and Experimental Design file) from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) 
>    or from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
```

>    the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `Proteomics` ->`MetaQuantome Datacreation`
>     -> `{{ page.title }}`):
>
>    ```
>    [Experimental Design](https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ExperimentalDesign.tsv?download=1)
>    [Protein Database](https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ProteinDB_cRAP.fasta?download=1)

> >    [T2_A1 MZML File](https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/T2_A1.mzml?download=1)

Reviewer 2: and you don't need the `?download=1` bits btw on the URLs

  - pratikdjagtap 
  - emmaleith
  - mariecrane
  
follow_up_training:

    -
        type: "internal"

>         topic_name: metaproteomics

Reviewer 2: it is in the "proteomics" topic right?

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Data upload
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
> 2. Import the files ( 6 MZML files, a Protein FASTA file and Experimental Design file) from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) 
>    or from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
>
>    ```

> >    Experimental Design - https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ExperimentalDesign.tsv?download=1

Reviewer 2: so only the urls, one per line, like this:

```suggestion
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4037137/files/ExperimentalDesign.tsv
```
